# I Made Millions from the Financial Crisis — Corrections

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FvOa5EmckHE

---

00:00:03
[Applause] [Music]

00:00:14
He won his job in a card game. He made a fortune from the financial crisis. Now he's warning the world the system has to change. Today we hear his story. This shutdown is creating the greatest wealth heist. The unemployment rate has skyrocketed to its highest level since the **G**reat **D**epression. One of the largest corporate bailouts with as few strings as possible.

00:00:36
[Luke] **I**n **A**merican history**,** welcome to the **A**nother **E**urope podcast with me **L**uke **C**ooper and my co-host **Z**oe **W**illiams. **T**oday we're joined by Gary Stevenson a one-time city trader. He made a small fortune after the last financial crisis. He successfully predicted that massive state support to the financial system would lead to a sharp inflation in asset prices, so things like property stocks and shares. He was right. As the real world economy was barely growing there were bull markets in **W**all **S**treet and the City of London. You'd be forgiven for thinking the rich got bailed out and the rest got sold out.

00:01:14
Gary retired from the city at the age of 27 and is now working as an economist warning of the dangers of an economic model with big returns for capital, low returns for labour. After his dazzling predictions in the last financial crisis we'll be asking him what he makes of the one we're in, an even bigger economic collapse brought about by the coronavirus pandemic. He also has a **Y**ou**T**ube channel Gary's **E**conomics where this podcast will also be broadcast. He's got some great videos on there so check it out. As usual you can feed back to us on the show and feed in ideas on what you'd like us to cover in the future by emailing podcast**@a**nother**e**urope.org.

00:01:55
You can also support the podcast by leaving a rating or review on your podcast platform. An extended version of this podcast is available to ~~members of another europe is possible another europe is the home of the european left in britain~~ members of Another Europe **I**s **P**ossible. Another Europe is the home of the **E**uropean left in Britain. **B**y joining us you participate in our movement building efforts to confront injustice, oppose **B**rexit disaster capitalism and promote grassroots internationalism. To join**,** support our work and gain access to an extended version of this podcast**,** go to **a**nother**e**urope.org**/j**oin.

00:02:35
[Luke] Gary welcome to the show so tell us how did you come to work as a trader**?**

00:02:39
[Gary] ~~and what was it like but it's~~ **It's** a funny story actually**,** ~~um~~ I actually won my job trading in a card game when I was at university. Seems strange but I guess that's how things happen sometimes. Pre-financial crisis so I did my undergrad at ~~lsc~~ **LSE**, London **S**chool of **E**conomics. I don't know if you know the university well but back then**,** I'm guessing it's still the same now, it was a bit of a mad place where a lot of people were borderline obsessed with getting jobs in investment banking. I remember I did my first year**,** I came back in second year and just suddenly everyone was applying for 20**,** 30 different investment banks and they're applying to all these different divisions which all seem to have acronym names, IBD and M&A or ~~nbs~~ **ABS** trading with CDS and I really didn't have any idea what was going on. For me it was quite intimidating really because I don't really know anyone who comes ~~to~~ **from** that sort of background.

00:03:31
Somewhere from the year above approached me and he was being paid by ~~citibank he he'd interned at seat bank~~ **Citibank, he'd interned at Citibank** year before and he was being paid to sort of do some sort of talent scouting or something. He approached me and said, "Oh, ~~see bank high as~~ **Citibank** hires one trader a year through a ~~math~~**maths** game." ~~um~~ I heard you're pretty good at ~~math~~ **maths** so maybe you should try that.

00:03:48
So I thought why not I'll give it a go. So I turned up for this ~~math~~ **maths** competition and it was kind of like it was a card game like a sort of supposed to be a trading style game**,** you buy and you sell, but it's hard**,** it was a maths game. So I just ~~ended~~ **entered** that game and I won the first round**,** I got through to the final and then I ~~i~~ studied it a lot**,** I went to the final and ~~and~~ I won that and I got a job.

00:04:08
It was completely mad. Yeah, it was, I was working at DFS fluffing pillows at the time in weekends and holidays getting paid ~~45 pounds~~ **£45** a day. I don't ~~believe you~~ quite believe that I'd manage to get a job in this bizarre fashion but you know I won the game so it's great. And then I turned up on the trading ~~field~~ **floor** and I would have just turned 20. I didn't really know what's going on**,** I was just offering to buy people coffees and go get lunches because that's ~~supposed~~ **what you're supposed** to do ~~with~~ **at** DFS. But yeah, they ~~they~~ liked me**,** I ~~i~~ didn't know what's going on**,** I don't know if you've been on a trading ~~field~~ **floor** but it's a crazy place, it's a huge huge huge room and everyone's got like six or seven or even nine monitors and lots of shouting and lots of noise and yeah it took a bit of time to figure out what was happening.

00:04:49
[Luke] ~~And what and what~~ **What** year was that**?** ~~was that~~ That must have been before the financial crash**?**

00:04:54
[Gary] Right**,** so my internships would have been in 2006 and 2007 because I started full time in 2008.

00:04:59
[Luke] Right right right right**,** so you basically arrived just in time for this unbelievable explosion which must have been an experience kind of in itself. What ~~um~~ what was the atmosphere like then**?** Did you did it seem really extreme or because you'd had nothing to compare it to did it just seem like they were extreme**?**

00:05:17
[Gary] ~~already~~ **Already,** I started full time in **J**une 2008 right so the ~~lima~~ **Lehman** crisis was really soon after I began. "**L**ehman **B**rothers staff arrived at work in London this morning to be told the bank had been put into administration. **S**tocks all around the world are tanking because of the crisis on Wall Street."

00:05:33
[Gary] At the time I was a bit too inexperienced really perhaps to grasp the severity of it but you know the traders let me know. They said like this is a massive massive deal here, sort of amounts of money being made and lost were much much bigger. People were saying you know ~~citibank~~ **Citibank** was ~~bowed~~ **bailed** out by the **A**merican government and relatively quickly people ~~realized~~ **realised** that the ~~sovereignty~~ **solvency** of the bank was under threat but also that there was ~~a~~ the ~~sovereignty~~ **solvency** of basically every bank under threat. So right**,** they knew it was serious**,** I knew it was serious without really knowing what serious meant if that makes sense because I was so young. I was sort of taking it**,** I could see the emotion from the traders.

00:06:14
At ~~lse~~ **LSE**, everyone's applying for 20**,** 30 banks**,** it's kind of random what banks you end up at you know. So I had a couple of friends who were at **L**ehman and just you know a couple years into their career they suddenly lost their jobs. So...

00:06:24
[Zoe] The kind of overall mood**,** did it feel like kind of in the eye of the crisis**?** Did your colleagues seem like they thought there was a big reckoning coming with the way the system worked**,** the way the economic model worked**,** the way finance plugged into that, or were people not thinking in that kind of way**?**

00:06:42
[Gary] ~~way~~ On the trading floor traders are very very focused on making money. They're not really ~~incentivized~~ **incentivised** to think about what's happening with the system, especially not on any sort of moral or human sense. They're very ~~incentivized~~ **incentivised** to make predictions. So they might be thinking about for example in the area where I worked a big part of what we did and what we were supposed to do was predict the strength of the future economy. So obviously we have to do a lot of that you know and there was a guy on my team who did really well which was just saying this is going to be a disaster**,** it's going to last a really really long time**,** we're not going to get out of this for ages**,** and he made a lot of money on that. But there's no**,** you're not ~~incentivized~~ **incentivised** to think about what that means really. You're very very heavily ~~incentivized~~ **incentivised** to make correct predictions so there's not really much space for sort of sitting and pondering.

00:07:32
[Zoe] What does this mean for society**?** And so when the bailouts happened, surely at that moment like the whole idea that free market economics teaches us that if a state provides resources to the private sector then that creates a moral hazard**-**like situation because if the risk mechanism in the system just won't work in the way that it's meant to work because companies will know that they're getting bailed out.

00:08:01
[Gary] At the end of the day**,** was there no**,** so there's no conversation on the trading floor really about hang on a minute the whole global financial system has just been bailed out by the state but things go on as normal**?** At the time the bailouts happened there were a couple of people who would mention this kind of thing on the trading floor. ~~there's~~ **These are** ~~some~~ huge places**,** there's hundreds of traders right**,** and I was on interest rates trading. People there would be very willing to say well it was the credit traders that blew the economy up so they sort of they washed their hands of it**,** so it was nothing to do with us kind of thing. I think there were some people who were aware like you know it's people on this floor who've made a lot of money even if it wasn't people on my team directly and then when the losses come in the government's taking them**,** people were aware that happened.

00:08:50
But a trading floor is not really much of a place for ~~moralizing~~ **moralising**. Just just a couple of years after 2008 we used to have once a year we had what was called a trading off site where all the traders go to some place somewhere and have like a weekend away to get to know each other and this kind of stuff. And just two years later in 2010 was it or 2011**,** at the beginning of the year, they took us away and they gave us this massive speech saying look you're all great traders we think you should take more risk. And they gave us these little camo baseball hats. ~~we~~ **They** said on the front, "**G**o **B**ig or **G**o **H**ome**,"** and they said if you're comfortable taking a risk in ~~in~~ one million dollars why don't you take it in 10 million.

00:09:26
And the**,** I mean this is clearly taking advantage of the system that is in place with investment banks which runs all the way through. As an individual trader if you make a lot of money you'll be paid a lot of money but if you lose a lot of money you might get fired but you won't lose any money personally. But the same situation exists for your boss and the same situation exists for his boss and the same situation exists for his boss. So there really is an incentive for traders and all really through that structure to encourage greater risk taking to the extent that even a couple years after 2008 when these banks collectively blew the world up we would be encouraged just to take much more risk**,** go back and take much more risk than you normally would.

00:10:08
"**G**reed**,** fraud**,** dishonesty and arrogance**,** these are some of the words that best describe the reality of **W**all **S**treet."

00:10:19
[Luke] ~~today~~ **Today,** the predictions that you made a lot of money on**,** what were they ~~on were they on interest rates~~**?**

00:10:23
[Gary] ~~on were they on interest rates~~ **Yeah**, so the way interest rates are supposed to work**,** they're they're fixed by the central bank so in this country the **B**ank of **E**ngland, in the US the Federal Reserve. And the idea is actually relatively simple right**,** if they think**,** if the central bank thinks the economy is weak and ~~it's stimulating~~ **needs** stimulating, they cut the interest rate and that's supposed to make it cheaper for companies to borrow and invest, cheaper for individuals to borrow and spend, it makes it less worthwhile saving and it's supposed to encourage people and companies to get out and spend and get the economy going. If they think the economy is too hot and they're worried about inflation they do the opposite**,** they raise rates and that's supposed to encourage people to save.

00:10:59
So in 2008 all those interest rates collapsed very very quickly to zero or close to zero. Previously they've been sort of like five ~~percentage~~ **percent** depending on the country you're looking at. And at the time because it was such a huge move in interest rates, previously they'd move rates very small amount like four and a half to four and a quarter, five and three quarters to five and a half. Suddenly everyone was cutting**,** I think the UK cut from five and a half to zero point five and every country was doing that. Everyone expected there to be a really rapid recovery based on these huge moves ~~and~~ **in** interest rates.

00:11:32
So my job was to basically bet what will the interest rate be in two years time**,** in three years time and based on basically **when** will the economy recover. If you go back and look at the history of this it's really interesting because the rates collapsed to zero in 2008 and at the time everyone predicted they'll go up in 2009. Then when 2009 came the economy was still weak**,** those predictions got pushed back to 2010. **B**ut in 2010 it was 2011**,** 2011 it was 2012. In 2012 it was 2013. **A**nd even if you go back last year people were predicting rises for this year. So it's really phenomenal to think about. It's as if you turn on the weather forecast and they were just predicting 37 degrees and sunny every day in London, or if you ~~watch~~ **watched** the penalty ~~shooter and they all hit off for a throw-in~~ **shootout and they all hit it off for a throw-in**. They've just been wrong every single year.

00:12:22
So my job was to bet will this happen and after seeing the first couple of years of predicting a recovery that didn't happen I started to become**,** I started to question really the ideas I learned at the university and why is the recovery not happening**,** what is the problem. And I developed these theories that inequality is much more important than most economists ~~to realize~~ **realise** which means that because we're not addressing inequality the crisis will be very very long term because we're not fixing the underlying problem essentially. So I basically bet that rates will stay zero or close to zero for a very long time.

00:12:56
[Luke] And they did**!** **I**s it right to say that if you're the one trader who's getting the predictions right and everyone else is getting the predictions wrong, that means that you're going to make more money**?** Is that a fair assumption**?**

00:13:10
[Gary] Yeah yeah**,** I mean the things have changed a little bit since I was there ~~um~~ but back then you were expected to make personally a percentage of what you made for the bank. It was all a little bit murky because there's no contractual obligation for the bank to do that so at the end of the year you kind of have to hope that they actually pay you which was sort of a strange setup. But yeah the idea is that you will get paid more personally if you make more for the bank.

00:13:38
[Luke] **A**s you had this ~~realization~~ **realisation**, did your politics change as you were doing the economics**?** Your personal politics**?**

00:13:45
[Gary] ~~and~~ **N**ot at first because you know at the time I was just super focused on understanding the economy. It's ~~it's~~ such an interesting place to work and to sort of be there competitively making predictions, trying to make the right predictions. I was really just single-mindedly focused on try make the right prediction, try and make the right prediction. Now when I first came to this idea that I think inequality is much much more important than economists ~~realize~~ **realise** or what they teach at university, at first I wasn't certain of that**,** I was quite confident because you know I've been thinking about these ideas for a couple of years but I wasn't certain. But I was confident enough to make a big bet on it and then yeah when it came back super successful and it was phenomenally successful that year when I did that**,** 2011, I was the most profitable trader in the bank globally that year on the back of that.

00:14:33
[Gary] Then when that came back**,** at first I just wanted to make sure I got paid because this is a weird world and you know they might just fire you instead of paying you and it was a lot of money that was on the line. But once that was done I sort of sat back and I thought well that was strange because I mean you might think in a ~~civilized~~ **civilised** society if you have been paid a lot of money to correctly predict that there's going to be a long-term economic crisis there might be some sort of like escalation like okay you should probably go and talk to the government and explain what's going to happen. But they just said all right that was great**,** we all made money**,** do it again.

00:15:07
It was only after it happened**,** it had been really successful that I started to think well that was strange. If you're very very good at making economic predictions you can get paid a lot by **a** bank but there's not really many other places. I mean that's why I'm here on this podcast right**,** to try and tell people**,** right**,** if the government's listening give me a shout I'll work for free I'll tell you what's happening.

00:15:30
[Luke] I mean but just that story**,** I mean the story itself is just extraordinary because of course it's just so true and so correct that if you have something to contribute to the structure of society that is hang on a minute inequality is unproductive to our economy, the bank has made a massive amount of cash from that prediction**,** you**,** and then they say okay fine that's good work go away and do it again. And of course this prediction has really a lot of social utility for the rest of society. As you say in a ~~civilized~~ **civilised** country and in a ~~civilized~~ **civilised** world this would be hang on a minute we need to have significant macroeconomic change to redress the imbalance between ~~labor~~ **labour** and capital right**?**

00:16:21
[Gary] I mean what what happened was this sort of problem sort of built up in me over time. Eventually I escalated to management and I said you know I just don't think I can do this anymore because I think you know my genuine predictions at the time were that the economy was going to be really weak for a long time and they still are**,** they have been ever since and the predictions have been very successful ever since then. And you know after about six months after that I went to management and said yeah I think I need to take some time out and figure out what I can do here. And then they very strongly encouraged me not to do that and then about a year later I went back and said look I think I need to leave I think I need to go and work for a charity that's work on inequality because I just don't think it's right me just sitting here making money on the world being terrible. And ~~um~~ yeah let's just**,** I don't want to go in too much detail on that but let's say the bank made it very difficult for me to make that decision of finally leaving and ~~uh~~ talking publicly about inequality.

00:17:14
So yes it's a strange world we live in where if you**,** you can get paid huge sums of money working for investment banks betting the economy will be terrible forever. But I mean after**,** I went to Oxford ~~and~~ to do a master's degree and tried to tell the professors and say look**,** economy is going to be terrible forever and they just said well go read this 100 page paper you know**,** they weren't too ~~interesting~~ **interested**.

00:17:34
[Luke] I think that's a lot of the journey but I mean I should say for podcast listeners I mean you've written some stuff for ~~open democracy~~ **openDemocracy** that we will put in the podcast description. But we came across you through a mutual friend who works ~~for another europe is possible alina ravanava he's~~ **who's** a **M**omentum member in **T**ower **H**amlets. So just at this stage, you know you must have in this journey through **C**itibank to **O**xford you ended up thinking well hang on a minute this guy **J**eremy **C**orbyn, **M**omentum, they've actually got a point. I mean that's like a quite phenomenal journey in quite a short space of time.

00:18:13
[Gary] It might seem like a big journey really but for me I think**,** I don't view myself as a hugely political person but you know my life has been devoted for 15 years now to the study of economics and I've been very successful doing that, I've made a lot of money doing that, and I think it's because I have understood that inequality is phenomenally important. I think if you don't do something about it it's not just the moral issue here you know**,** it leads to low wages**,** unaffordable housing**,** lower living conditions. And that's what I think happens if you have very high inequality and I don't think it's really understood at university. I think that's the reason why I've been able to beat the market year after year.

00:18:53
[Gary] So since I think that that's my economic view I need to find a way to get my voice out basically. So I've been looking for the last few years basically just spaces where I can speak about inequality and its relevance to economics. So I've been looking through loads of different channels**,** I volunteered at **N**ew **E**conomics **F**oundation for a bit working with a guy called ~~james midway~~ **James Meadway**. When **M**omentum popped up ~~but~~ these guys were talking a lot about inequality and I thought maybe here's a place where I can get a bit of a voice. To be honest I've been looking all over the place you know**,** I wrote for the ~~daily express~~ **Daily Express** last week. Yeah it might seem like a long journey to be honest but you know I look**,** I learned about economics at ~~lsu~~ **LSE** and in the banking sector and the way I see it is if we don't do something about inequality the economy is going to be in a really really bad way. So you know for me it's not a political issue**,** do you want an economic disaster or don't you**?**

00:19:46
[Luke] Before we get back to the podcast with Gary and his truly amazing story, a quick shout out for a new series of podcasts I've made for the LSE about the causes of war and conflict in the 21st century. Across six episodes we dig deeper into the ideas and theory you need to make sense of societies experiencing intractable conflict and ~~organized~~ **organised** violence. We investigate the causes of conflict in the **H**orn of Africa**,** **C**entral Africa and the Middle East, expose the networks of dark money ~~fueling~~ **fuelling** conflict, and uncover the positive stories of democratic civil society resistance promoting peace and social justice. You can find them by searching for **C**onflict **Z**one from the LSE wherever you get your podcasts from.

00:20:41
[Luke] So to move on to that impending disaster or the disaster we're already in, can you describe how the economic choices made in the financial crash produced a sharp increase in global inequality**?**

00:20:53
[Gary] Yeah so when we go back to 2008 this is what economists might call a demand crisis right which is worth just talking about just a little bit. It's a crisis that happens when suddenly people stop spending. And that's an interesting crisis because I think when people think about economics they tend to think about the production side of things**,** they think oh we've got a problem because we're not producing enough. But 2008 and in many ways also this crisis now is coming about because people suddenly stop spending and that creates a problem because if people stop spending then companies ~~let~~ **lay** off workers they don't invest they don't grow and lots of people lose their jobs and we get high unemployment**,** people can't pay their bills.

00:21:31
So in that sense that crisis and this crisis ~~is~~ **are** now quite similar. Now modern mainstream economic thinking like you would get at university will basically tell you there's two things you can do in this kind of situation. One is what they'll call fiscal policy which is basically governments just come in and directly spend. So the problem with the economy is not enough spending so the government comes in they spend themselves and you know it could be on anything really but you know obviously there's a lot of talk this time of a **G**reen **N**ew **D**eal or you know necessary investments and infrastructure**,** this kind of thing. But the idea is we don't have enough spending in the economy so the government comes in and spends, that creates the spending, that creates the jobs, that prevents unemployment from going up. ~~uh~~ That's fiscal policy**,** that's one way to deal with it.

00:22:13
[Gary] And in 2008 a decision was kind of made over the longer term especially by the **C**onservative, it was a coalition government after 2010, not to really go for a lot of aggressive fiscal support**,** not to go for a lot of government support. So that meant instead we went for the other method of supporting which is what we call monetary policy**,** monetary stimulus. And in this mode of supporting an economy the central bank, so in this country the Bank of England, prints a lot of money. I think people get confused about that sometimes but you just need to understand the central bank is allowed to create new money electronically and then they lend that into the system.

00:22:47
Now this is a more interesting way of stimulating an economy because it doesn't directly create spending**,** it doesn't directly create demand. The people who get lent the money need to spend it. So what happened in 2008**,** largely the central bank lends loads of money to the commercial banks and then the commercial banks need to lend it on. But of course the people who can most easily borrow money from commercial banks are big investment funds or companies or richer individuals. And what happened in 2008 was because there wasn't much space for growth because there wasn't much spending, rich individuals and investment corporations they borrowed this money and rather than investing they just bought existing assets.

00:23:25
So if you go back and look at 2008 you can see even though the economy was really weak**,** relatively quickly after the crisis asset prices started roaring upwards. So the first one was gold**,** gold started flying and you might have seen just overnight last night gold hit a new all-time historic high. So it's happening again now. First gold started going up then relatively quickly stocks started going up and then after a short delay house prices started going up.

00:23:50
[Gary] So what happened in 2008 was because they chose just to go with full-on monetary policy**,** print new money, lend it into the economy, it tended to benefit rich people. Firstly because they could borrow the money and secondly because they use that to push asset prices up. And when asset prices go up who does that benefit**?** Well of course that benefits the people who own assets which is rich people again. So the focus on monetary policy without any direct government intervention led to a huge increase in inequality because of greater access to money for rich people and also huge increases in asset prices which are owned by rich people.

00:24:26
[Zoe] What would need to happen in society for**,** so capitalists aren't investing productively, they're investing in speculation in existing assets. What would actually need to happen in order to get those capitalists to invest in things like jobs**,** production**,** manufacturing capacity**,** a **G**reen industrial revolution, a Green New Deal**?**

00:24:50
[Gary] It's a tricky one really because the reason that the rich are not really investing in new production at the moment is because the demand isn't there. So it's a difficult situation**,** how do you encourage these guys**?** I mean basically there's two questions within your question**,** one is how do you get them to invest in good things as opposed to potentially socially harmful things**,** but the second question is how do you get them to invest at all. Because at the moment you know like I said gold is ~~a~~ **at a** record all-time historic high. Rich people buying gold doesn't do much for the economy obviously. Lots of stocks are at all-time highs as well. So it's difficult to encourage the rich to invest because ultimately what they're going to want to invest in is what's profitable. I think you probably do need to create the demand directly somehow and I think that's difficult to do without ~~direct~~ some form of direct government intervention.

00:25:39
So there's two ways you can get the rich to invest**,** you can either directly ~~incentivize~~ **incentivise** them or you can provide the customers. But I think the problem is because we don't have the spending we're not going to get the investment from the rich**,** so it's a little bit**,** it's a little bit of chicken and egg in the sense you need to get the spending first of all but it's very difficult to get the spending when the rich have all the money.

00:26:00
[Luke] Is there an argument then that the better way for a central bank to use those mechanisms it has is just a kind of helicopter money scheme where instead of putting ~~it's~~ the currency it's created into the hands of the commercial banking sector it just puts them into everybody's bank account**?** I mean I know they were talking about that at the beginning of the ~~corona virus~~ **coronavirus** crisis or rather the government weren't but people were.

00:26:24
[Gary] I mean it's interesting to say that because I mean this crisis is not identical to the last crisis and what has happened so far, it is actually quite similar to what you just said essentially. ~~um~~ Previously most of the newly printed money that the central bank created most of it went into the banking system. First of all some went directly to governments but this time a huge amount has gone to the government essentially and the government has used a lot of that money to support for example things like the furlough scheme and the self-employment scheme which means that ultimately the newly printed money has gone in to the bank accounts of people who are struggling in this crisis.

00:26:59
So in some sense especially because of the usage of the furlough scheme the policy response has been much more egalitarian in a sense**,** ~~be~~ much more supportive of ordinary people. And what that has meant is interestingly so far in this crisis even though the depths of it**,** if you look at falls in GDP, much sharper than 2008, actually most people have not felt anything like the kind of economic pain that was felt ~~like~~ in 2008 yet. But what I'm really concerned about is that the furlough scheme**,** firms have to start contributing to keep ~~works~~ **workers** on furlough from the end of this month which is in just a few days now and a lot of workers are going to be ~~left~~ **laid** off. So I'm worried that we've done really well to sort of stave off the worst human disaster so far in this crisis so far but it seems like we're just about to stop doing that and we're just going to let the human disaster come.

00:27:49
[Luke] In terms of the government's wider response to this crisis, what do you think**?** ~~that~~ **H**as it ~~has~~ been far-sighted in you know in the sense that they were putting money into people's bank accounts rather than into the bank accounts of commercial banks in the first instance**,** or do you think that was just a kind of knee-jerk ~~what we're going to do which and then and the~~ **reaction** and the kind of true nature of their response is coming out now**?**

00:28:12
[Gary] They had to do it**,** they had to do ~~they had to do~~ it. If they had not have done that the**,** it would have been a humanitarian disaster in this country. If they had not brought in a furlough scheme it would have been a humanitarian**,** it would have been unthinkable how bad it would have been had they not done that. So as much as it's great that they did do it**,** I don't want to congratulate them too much for doing it because every western country did it because they had to do it. Without doing that it would have been inevitably a disaster. So I can't say that they're noble people, all I can say is they're not complete idiots because they had to do that right**?**

00:28:46
[Luke] They absolutely had to do that. I mean looking at it unfold the BBC came out today saying it might take four years for the economy to recover. It feels like that's incredibly optimistic from where I'm sitting but obviously I'm not**,** I've never made my fortune doing economic predictions.

00:29:00
[Gary] They'll be talking about GDP as a whole right**?** GDP could recover in four years but I mean GDP took its time to recover after 2008 and it did eventually recover but by the time it recovered where were house prices compared to wages**?** So the GDP recovers but the inequality crisis remained and ordinary people felt the effects of that and I think those are the mistakes that we're going to repeat here. So I think the ~~photo~~ **furlough** scheme was phenomenal absolutely essential and vital.

00:29:30
But I've, this, I wrote about ~~my open democracy cycles and i put my~~ **it on openDemocracy and I put my** video up on YouTube, Gary's Economics, describing what happens to this money, how it's absolutely essential that it comes in but ultimately it's filtering up to higher income people and it's increasing inequality, just like ~~rapid in~~ **it did in** 2008. And we're already starting to see the effect on asset markets**,** the gold price**,** the stock prices. There's a lot of news coming in now that looks like house prices are moving upwards ~~with~~ **and** we're seeing the exact same things again which is**,** yes the absolute worst of the humanitarian disaster seem to be being prevented**,** we're not**,** hopefully we're not going to have another **G**reat **D**epression**,** ~~start~~ absolute collapse. But we're paying for that with increased inequality and I predict we'll see another big increase in house prices like we saw last time.

00:30:13
You have to ask what that's going to do you know**,** if house prices double again which is eventually what happened in London after the 2008 crisis, what does that mean for families that don't own housing now**?** It basically means they will never ever own housing. You're basically telling you know the ~~50~~ **50%** of the lowest wealth people, you guys lost capitalism**,** you will never get a house you know. ~~that~~ That ~~that is~~ **is,** so you might get a GDP recovery but it will be at the cost of basically canceling the bottom half of society and saying these guys will never own housing, ending social mobility. So I think we really need, when we talk about being farsighted we need to look at what's happening with inequality because if we ~~make if we~~ keep making the same mistake of just allowing inequality to ratchet up and up and up and up then it's going to be disaster for a lot of people.

00:31:01
[Luke] He's not a conventional economist and I'm not even sure if he's taught on university economics degrees but he had the very successful book **C**apital in the 21st **C**entury, Thomas **P**iketty, and he argues that when returns on capital are high, so the asset prices that you're talking about, and returns on wages are really low and depressed, then the inevitable result is just growing inequality. You've come to the conclusion from the ~~root~~ **route** you've described but ~~you~~ do you basically endors~~ing~~ what ~~pikaty~~ **Piketty** is saying and how he's analy~~zing~~**sing** things**?**

00:31:36
[Gary] I've read **P**iketty's book**,** it's a very very big book. ~~one picket you brought that bouquet was~~ When **Piketty** brought that book out, it was great because I've been thinking about inequality a lot in the previous years coming up. I think that book came out in 2012 maybe 2013. What that did was it really brought inequality onto the agenda. Up until then really I mean like I said I've been five years university studying economics**,** inequality**'s** hardly mentioned at all. So up until ~~pikay~~ **Piketty** brought that book out, it wasn't really in the ~~in the eyes of economies~~ **eyes of economists** at all, and it really brought it into the eyes of ~~economy so~~ **economists. So** I think he's done a really great service in doing that. In terms of the analysis itself it's not really the same kind of thing I'm thinking. There's actually a few guys now, some economists called **M**ian and **S**ufi working with a guy called **S**traub that are really looking at this idea that when inequality gets very large it creates a situation where all of the income is going to the rich and they've got nothing on which to spend it so they end up either lending it back to the poor or buying houses from the middle class.

00:32:36
And it means that inequality leads to greater inequality because if all the money goes to the rich they use that money to buy houses, that pushes house prices up which means maybe ordinary people who might not be too well off they think well I'm going to sell my house because I could have a really good life and the houses transfer up. I think we're really seeing that in society now. You're seeing that as the ~~roots~~ **rich** get richer they generate huge amounts of income from their wealth, they use that wealth to buy the rest of the wealth which means that inequality goes up even more. So these guys who are looking at this kind of stuff now**,** these guys **M**ian and **S**ufi and **S**traub**,** that's the kind of analysis I like more.

00:33:10
[Zoe] I was kind of wondering if, if we're talking about what we should be campaigning for**,** what economic vision the opposition should be building because it does seem to be a time ~~they did~~ **to** do that. Are we saying in the first instance that you have to stop using GDP as a measure**?** Because I've actually never heard anybody articulate so strongly what you just said in terms of how how ineffective a measure of a nation's wealth it is. So often people say GDP is no good ~~to~~ **as a** measure because it doesn't measure well-being. But actually what's wrong with GDP is that ~~it measures~~ when you aggregate ~~with~~ the wealth of a nation you completely erase the the story of the people who don't hold it. So should you in the first instance be saying GDP is no longer our thing and not because we want to measure happiness instead**?**

00:33:57
[Gary] Yeah it's a good question. I really remember during the the Brexit debates before the Brexit**,** I don't know if it was **Q**uestion **T**ime**,** there was some **C**onservative MP**,** it might have been George Osborne on there and he was talking about how GDP has gone up and up and up and some**,** I think it was a woman in the crowd**,** stood up and she shouted out**,** "**T**hat's your GDP**!**" And I thought good on you because she's**,** I'm guessing she's not a professional economist, but she's ~~realized~~ **realised** something I think a lot of economists probably should ~~realize~~ **realise**. The problem is personally I think from my experience at universities a big problem with economics is at the big universities almost everyone in the department is from a wealthy background. They don't ~~realize~~ **realise** that the economy is very different for rich people as it is from ordinary people.

00:34:36
And as GDP is going up and up and up I think a lot of people are very aware that lives maybe haven't gotten better for a lot of people, maybe a lot of people my generation**,** younger than me, might feel that their parents**'** lives were easier economically than theirs even though GDP goes up and up and up. So I wouldn't say completely throw GDP out like it's a completely useless measure, of course it is a useful measure. But if GDP is going up and at the same time loads and loads of people are saying my life's getting worse, listen to that and give it a thought that maybe something's really happening because we've got a big problem in economics that very few people ~~with more than any~~ **from an ordinary** background are getting into these university departments anymore. So if ordinary people are coming to you and saying no**,** things are not good for us you have to listen to them I think.

00:35:19
[Gary] So don't completely ~~acknowledge~~ **reject** GDP, but listen also to ordinary people and what they're saying and if they say we're not happy with what's happening in the economy ask them why and answer those questions. Because like I said the last two years I did a masters at Oxford and I found that the faculty there were unbelievably disconnected from what was happening in the real world. And I spoke to one of the professors**,** I said to him**,** you know he asked me why are you so unhappy in the lectures and I said because you're not talking about what's really happening. Why don't you talk about the housing crisis**?** And he said to me well because the housing crisis is only in London. And I said well the housing crisis is only in London because there's no jobs outside of London.

00:35:57
And he said to me**,** "**Y**es there are jobs outside of London**,** I've got a job." This guy's an economics professor at Oxford university, you know if you're going to tell like some guy who's lost his job in a factory in ~~wigan~~ **Wigan** you're going to say well actually there's a vacancy at Oxford for an economics ~~suppressor~~ **professor** why don't you go and apply for that. Like it's ~~it's~~ boggles the mind how you know these guys standing there with capes and bow ties ~~tell him~~ **telling you** everything's fine, you're like, honestly it's ~~it's~~ a massive**,** it's a massive massive massive problem**,** a lack of representation of people from ordinary financial positions in ~~these in~~ the world of economics. It has to be fixed because in the end you end up with a load of rich people saying everything's great because for them it's great.

00:36:40
We have to fix that and you know part of that is not just fixating on one measure. I mean the idea that you could reduce**,** boil down the whole economy to a number**,** ~~269 billion~~ or something like this**,** it is absurd isn't it**?** And the fact that so many economists have sold themselves to that perhaps illustrates maybe how short-sighted they're being.

00:37:00
[Luke] Yeah so we've covered really brilliantly the role that if you only look at it in terms of monetary policy then that's a really big factor in creating this high inequality system. Could we now like come on to talk about what the alternative is and what the government should be doing**?** Because presumably this means, and I think it was implied by what you said earlier, that the government should be engaging in direct job creation in response to the crisis because you're arguing well look we shouldn't really expect the private sector and the very wealthy with all the capital to be investing productively at the moment**,** it's going to be that the government will need to take up the slack**,** say**,** is that right**?** And if it's right how does the government pay for it**?**

00:37:47
[Gary] Yeah what I would say first of all is I've spoken quite negatively about monetary policy. I just want to be clear I'm not against the monetary expansion**,** I don't think the monetary expansion is a bad thing in and of itself. You know if you go back and look at the Great Depression back then they didn't expand the monetary supply and it was it was **a** horrendous disaster. And probably the money that they've pumped into ~~their~~ **the** system both now and in 2008 probably did prevent the kind of terrible humanitarian disaster that we saw back in the Great Depression. But it led to this huge increase in inequality and that huge increase in inequality has led to long-term stagnation.

00:38:19
So I don't want to say I'm opposed to monetary policy because I'm not but we need to then address this inequality that has been caused. Because once you then have huge levels of inequality then you have the situation where all of the income and all of the wealth is being held by very rich people and what we know about very rich people is they don't spend a lot of money comparative to how much money they have. So once all the money gets captured by the richest you end up with this very low demand economy because you know it doesn't matter how much money Bill Gates has**,** if he's a million times richer than an ordinary person, he's probably more than that times richer, he's not gonna eat three million meals a day**,** he's not gonna spend enough money to drive the economy.

00:39:00
So we need to address this inequality question. So what I would say is look**,** throw the money in because it's helping**,** it's working**,** that has managed us to get so far in this current crisis without a disaster. But you have to address this inequality**,** you have to find a way to address this inequality. And that's why what I've been campaigning for up till now in this crisis has been a wealth tax. And when I say wealth tax I want to make it clear I'm not talking about you know doctors and lawyers or nurses and teachers who might be earning higher than average. I'm talking about people who own huge amounts of wealth, people who maybe have net wealth of over ~~5~~ **£5** million**,** ~~10~~ **£10** million**,** this kind of money. These guys who are gonna make huge amounts of money in this crisis just like they did in the last crisis, we need to find ways to make these guys contribute because as it is they just get richer and richer every year**,** they suck the wealth out of the middle class and you can see the shrinking homeownership rates in this country.

00:39:49
That that wealth is not disappearing**,** it's going up to the very very ~~riches~~ **richest**. So I think it's really important that we think think about how can we address this inequality going forward and for me that has to be looking at the tax system. My concern is that when we come out of this people are going to look at how can we raise revenues and if you look at how to raise revenues you're always going to find it's easier to tax the middle class and the poor because these guys can't defend themselves**,** it's difficult to tax the rich. But if we do that we're not going to fix inequality and we're going to end up with greater inequality over the long term which is going to lead us to more and more long-term economic stagnation.

00:40:20
[Gary] So what I'm pushing for at the moment is a wealth tax on very wealthy individuals. It's not going to be easy to do**,** it needs to be well planned and well designed and it might even require some degree of international cooperation. Now that's not going to be easy but right now every single country in the world has the same problem so this is an unbelievable opportunity for us to fix this problem and if we don't fix it it's just going to get worse**,** inequality will get bigger and bigger**,** house prices will go up and up and up and accumulating any sort of financial stability will become increasingly impossible for ordinary people. So what I'm pushing for at the moment is a wealth tax**,** it's not going to be quick, it's not going to be easy but ~~it's~~ I think it's vital if you want to avoid long-term economic stagnation**,** I'm talking about decades.

00:41:04
[Luke] That concludes this episode for those listening on the podcast platforms. This podcast was produced as part of a collaboration with the ~~friedrich herbert stifton~~ **Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung**. For more information on their work on building progressive dialogues between **G**ermany and Britain go to ~~fes hyphen london.org~~ **fes-London.org**. An extended version of this podcast is available to members of Another Europe ~~as~~ **I**s **P**ossible. In this week's extra time we asked Gary for his thoughts on whether the system of global inequality is driving support for political nationalism. Another Europe is the home of the **E**uropean left in Britain. To join our people-powered movement, go to anothereurope.org forward slash join.

00:41:53
[Music]

00:41:55
[Luke] You've said that your game is economic predictions not political ones. So with that massive caveat aside can I take the liberty of asking you whether you think that there's a link between global inequality and the economic choices made since 2008 and the type of politics we've got since 2008 which with a few exceptions here and there does seem to see across the globe ~~and it~~ not just in **E**urope the rise of quite nasty strong man**,** and they are men, ethnic nationalists from Modi in India, that we did a podcast on, to Trump in the United States.

00:42:37
And you know**,** Trump, to use Trump as an example I mean he actually I would say didn't answer the conditions that you're talking about. He certainly hasn't proposed anything that would really address ~~a~~ global economic inequality and far from a wealth tax has cut**,** ~~a~~ huge tax cuts for the rich. But nonetheless in terms of the political language he used to take power back in 2016 it was very very strongly motivated and involved ~~to~~ **in** this kind of critique of ~~globalization~~ **globalisation**, a system that isn't working for people. And it seems that that argument has been occupied by the far right globally generally and not the left. So is there a link between this rise of nationalism and authoritarianism and those economic choices**?**

00:43:26
[Gary] Yeah that's a good question. I mean I'll stress before I answer that that obviously economics **is** my own expertise so politics**,** of course I've got opinions like everyone but you know take what I say with a pinch of salt. What I'll say is I come from quite a poor background and I think that people that I grew up with they feel that things are not getting better, they feel things are getting more difficult and I think they feel ignored. I think they feel that nobody's listening**,** nobody's addressing what's happening to them. You know I think they just feel like it doesn't matter who they vote for**,** things don't get better. You know that's the sense that I get you know from from people I grew up with**,** people in my family**,** people I speak to.

00:44:06
I think a lot of that**,** you know I'm sure it's not 100**%** economic but I think a lot of that is economic. People just feel you know like you know my dad**,** he never went to university you know**,** he just worked for the post office his whole life but he's got a house**,** he raised three kids on that. You know we never had a lot of money but we were**,** we were secure. Nowadays you'd struggle to live on you know just going to get a job at a post office you know with just one parent working.

00:44:31
So I think people feel that things are not getting better for them and I think people feel that mainstream politicians are not answering that question. You know I think they've lost faith in politicians and you know I mean I've lost faith in politicians**,** I've lost faith in economists to be honest. You know I mean people also**,** just like I said**,** economists have been predicting the recession would end next year for 12 years you know. People hear that**,** they get the idea that the people in charge have got no idea what's going on.

00:44:55
[Gary] So if that's what everybody thinks then if some new guy turns up and says ~~that~~ I'm one of you, I'm with you guys I'll lead you out of this you know, and he goes and has a pint in the pub with them, they'll be down because you know these guys need help and they're not getting it and they feel that they don't **get** listen**ed** to.

00:45:13
So you know like I said I'm not a political expert you know but I think the economic situation for a lot of people is not good**,** they can't get financial security, it's not getting better**,** they want answers. And you know if the mainstream political parties are not able to offer it then they'll look for alternatives. So I think all of us you know especially if we're from more privileged financial situations, I don't come from that background but I know I'm in that situation now, we need to take it upon ourselves to engage with people who are not as financially secure and ask them why are you unhappy**,** what's wrong. You know we need to bring them into the political process because if we don't then they're easy game for anyone who turns up you know**,** and I think that's a little bit what we're seeing.

00:45:50
[Luke] Yeah I completely agree. One of the research projects we do at the ~~lsc~~ **LSE** has been on Brexit and quote unquote the left behind places in Britain. I mean interestingly enough where you grew up**,** **T**ower **H**amlets**,** is not ~~classic center~~ **a classic centre** of the stereotype of the Brexit vote. Of course you know it's a deprived area but your stereotypical Brexit voting area is somewhere like Mansfield and there you find a really strong sense that we're not being listened to, that the system isn't working for us. ~~that it~~ In terms of its economic profile it tends to have very low wages but fairly reasonably high levels of home ownership and low house prices, house prices being obviously as you would argue a proxy for whether people want to live there**,** a proxy for demand right**?**

00:46:43
So you get this profile of quite middle of the road towns and there I guess it leads me on to an economics question because one of the things that you see in Mansfield is the the whole economy is structured around these horrendous warehouses. Sports Direct has ~~won~~ **one** infamously where the ~~labor~~ **labour** market conditions and ~~labor~~ **labour** rights are just really poor. So one of the things that we've ~~emphasized~~ **emphasised** on in this discussion so far is the role of the state in raising and ~~re~~ in delivering redistribution. I suppose there's another way that it could be done and I guess this is the question**,** it would be raising workers**'** rights, giving workers more rights, more access to trade union representation, stronger trade unions. That presumably is another way of ensuring that labour has more of a stake in this system than it does at the moment vis-a-vis capital.

00:47:37
[Gary] Yeah I think this is**,** these are all important things to do**,** you know you need to give people, ordinary working people**,** more power. But obviously my focus is always on wealth distribution and wealth inequality**,** so as much as you need to give these people more ~~organizational~~ **organisational** power, I think you also need**,** they also need to get more wealth and more money. And I don't think we can do that unless we extract some demand from the rich.

00:48:00
I mean when I think about these areas like Mansfield, I've never been to Mansfield so but I'll put this on my website. ~~um~~ **W**hen I talk about the effects of inequality on an economy, and my website**,** my website is wealtheconomics.org, I talk about if you have a very unequal economy then all of the wealth is held by a small group. Of course all of the jobs are going to be where those people are and if you look at the places where housing is expensive now it's not just big cities like London**,** it's also little cities like Oxford and Cambridge and ski villages. But what do these places have in common**?** It's where rich people spend their time. The place where rich people study are expensive**,** the place where rich people go on holiday are expensive because if you give all of the money to rich people then ordinary people can only get a job if they're near the rich people, if they can serve the rich people somehow.

00:48:48
[Gary] So it obviously leads to a situation where you gut the rest of the country because you know rich people they probably don't spend time in Mansfield, nothing against Mansfield, but they probably don't right**?** And you know if you don't redistribute wealth then you will have a very geographically concentrated economy, if you concentrate the wealth you will concentrate the activity geographically as well.

00:49:08
So I'm not an expert on workers**'** rights and unions so I don't want to say too much**,** lots of people I'm sure have more informed opinions than me. But what I want to say is it's important that we protect the wealth of people as well, their ability to own assets**,** the ability to own houses because people are losing that right now and I don't want to lose sight of that. And if we have a more equal distribution then the people in Mansfield can work for each other and they can pay each other and they can get good wages like that. But if we give all the money to you know 100 families in London it's always going to be difficult for ~~them people in in all~~ **the people in** the rest of the country to find good work.
